ajāmilo nāma mahīsura: purā
caran vibho dharmapathān gṛhāśramī |
gurorgirā kānanametya dṛṣṭavān
sudhṛṣṭaśīlāṃ kulaṭāṃ madākulām ||1||
ajāmila: nāma mahīsura:	The Braahmin by the name Ajaamil
purā	long ago
caran vibho dharmapathān	O Lord! Who was leading a righteous life
gṛhāśramī	(and) who was a householder
guro:-girā	at the request of his father
kānanam-etya	going to the forest
dṛṣṭavān	saw
sudhṛṣṭśīlām	an immodest
kulaṭām	(and) immoral woman
madākulām	given to drinking
O Lord! Long ago there was a Braahmin householder named Ajaamil who led a virtuous life. He went to the forest (for collecting sacrificial fuel) at his father's request. There he met an immoral, immodest woman who was given to drinking.
svata: praśānto'pi tadāhṛtāśaya:
svadharmamutsṛjya tayā samāraman |
adharmakārī daśamī bhavan puna-
rdadhau bhavannāmayute sute ratim ||2||
svata: praśānta:-api	self controlled, though
tat-āhṛta-āśaya:	his mind being attracted by her
sva-dharmam-utsṛjya	all his duties, giving up
tayā samāraman	her (company) enjoying
adharmakārī	unrighteous
daśamī bhavan puna:-	very old becoming, then
dadhau	gave
bhavat-nāma-yute sute	who bore Thy name, to his son
ratim	attachment
Though by nature a man of self control his mind was attracted to her. He gave up all his duties and revelling in her company led a sinful life. As he became old, he became very much attached to his son who bore Thy name - Naaraayana.
sa mṛtyukāle yamarājakiṅkarān
bhayaṅkarāṃstrīnabhilakṣayan bhiyā |
purā manāk tvatsmṛtivāsanābalāt
juhāva nārāyaṇanāmakaṃ sutam ||3||
sa mṛtyukāle	he, at death time
yamarāja-kiṅkarān	the death god's messengers
bhayaṅkarān-trīn-	very fierce, three (of them)
abhilakṣayan	seeing (before him)
bhiyā	in fear
purā manāk	long ago, certainly
tvat-smṛti-vāsanā-balāt	a (faint) memory of Thee, by its (Thy memory's) strength
juhāva	called
nārāyaṇa-nāmakaṃ sutam	Naaraayana named his son
At the time of death, he saw before him three fierce looking emissaries of Yama - the god of death. He called out in fright the name of his son Naaraayana, induced by the strength of the memory of his past devotion to Thee.
durāśayasyāpi tadātvanirgata-
tvadīyanāmākṣaramātravaibhavāt |
puro'bhipeturbhavadīyapārṣadā:
caturbhujā: pītapaṭā manoramā: ||4||
durāśayasya-api tadā-tu	then even though he was evil minded
anirgata tvadīya-	emerging, of Thy
nāma-akṣara-mātra-vaibhavāt	name's letters,solely by, its glory
pura:-abhipetu:-	before him appeared
bhavadīya pārṣadā:	Thy emissaries
caturbhujā: pītapaṭā: manoramā:	having four arms, wearing yellow garments with lovely appearance
In spite of his evil nature, by the glory of the letters of Thy name uttered by him, there appeared before him, Thy emissaries.They had four arms and were wearing yellow robes and were of enchanting appearance.
amuṃ ca saṃpāśya vikarṣato bhaṭān
vimuñcatetyārurudhurbalādamī |
nivāritāste ca bhavajjanaistadā
tadīyapāpaṃ nikhilaṃ nyavedayan ||5||
amuṃ ca saṃpāśya	him (Ajaamila) tying up with ropes
vikarṣata: bhaṭān	(and) dragging, to the messengers (of Yama)
vimuñcata-iti-	"Release him" thus (saying)
ārurudhu:-balāt-amī	(were) stopped by force, they
nivāritā:-te ca bhavat-janai:-	and were obstructed by Thy emissaries
tadā tadīya-pāpaṃ nikhilaṃ	then, all his sins
nyavedayan	(they) narrated
Seeing Ajaamil tied up with ropes and being dragged by the messengers of Yama, they were obstructed by Thy emissaries by force and were stopped to do so. Then the emissaries of Yama narrate all his sins.
bhavantu pāpāni kathaṃ tu niṣkṛte
kṛte'pi bho daṇḍanamasti paṇḍitā: |
na niṣkṛti: kiṃ viditā bhavādṛśā-
miti prabho tvatpuruṣā babhāṣire ||6||
bhavantu pāpāni	let there be sins
kathaṃ tu	how is it
niṣkṛte kṛte-api	atonements have been made even
bho daṇḍanam-asti paṇḍitā:	are there punishments, O Learned Ones!
na niṣkṛti kiṃ viditā	is atonement not known
bhavadṛśām-iti	to persons like you? Thus
prabho	O Lord
tvat-puruṣā babhāṣire	Thy emissaries spoke
O Lord! Thy emissaries told them that even if there were sins, how was it that there was punishment when atonement had been made. Did people like them who were learned, not know what atonement was?
śrutismṛtibhyāṃ vihitā vratādaya:
punanti pāpaṃ na lunanti vāsanām |
anantasevā tu nikṛntati dvayī-
miti prabho tvatpuruṣā babhāṣire ||7||
śruti-smṛtibhyāṃ	in the Srutis and Smritis
vihitā: vratādaya:	are laid down, the vows etc.,
punanti pāpaṃ	cleanse one of sins
na lunanti vāsanāṃ	but do not destroy the tendency
ananta-sevā tu	service to the Lord however,
nikṛntati dvayīm-iti	destroys both, thus
prabho	O Lord!
tvat-puruṣā babhāṣire	Thy emissaries did speak
O Lord! Thy emissaries told them that in the Srutis and Smritis as per the vows which are laid down, they absolve a person from sins, but do not curb the sinful tendency. Whereas, the service of the Lord! Destroys both - the sins and the sinful tendencies.
anena bho janmasahasrakoṭibhi:
kṛteṣu pāpeṣvapi niṣkṛti: kṛtā |
yadagrahīnnāma bhayākulo hare-
riti prabho tvatpuruṣā babhāṣire ||8||
anena bho	by him (Ajaamil) O! You (messengers of Yama)
janma-sahasra-koṭibhi:	in innumerable lives
kṛteṣu pāpeṣu-api	if he has committed sins also
niṣkṛti: kṛtā	atonement has been made
yat-agrahīt-nāma	because he took (uttered) the name
bhaya-ākula: hare:-iti	overcome by fear, of Hari, thus
prabho	O Lord!
tvat-puruṣā babhāṣire	Thy emissaries did speak
O Lord! Thy emissaries told the messengers of Yama that though overcome by fear, Ajaamil had uttered the Name of Hari. By that alone he had atoned for all the sins committed by him in innumerable lives.
nṛṇāmabuddhyāpi mukundakīrtanaṃ
dahatyaghaughān mahimāsya tādṛśa: |
yathāgniredhāṃsi yathauṣadhaṃ gadā -
niti prabho tvatpuruṣā babhāṣire ||9||
nṛṇām-abuddhyā-api	of human beings, unknowingly even,
mukund-kīrtanaṃ	the name of Mukund is chanted
dahati-agha-aughān	burns up all sins
mahimā-asya tādṛśa:	its glory is such
yathā-agni:-edhāṃsi	like fire (burning) fuel
yathā-auṣadhaṃ gadān iti	like medicine (curing) disease
prabho	O Lord! Thus
tvat-puruṣā babhāṣire	Thy emissaries did speak
O Lord! Thy emissaries told them that even if the chanting of The Name of Mukund is done unknowingly, by the human beings, it burns up all their sins. Its glory is like that of fire burning the fuel and like the medicine curing the disease.
itīritairyāmyabhaṭairapāsṛte
bhavadbhaṭānāṃ ca gaṇe tirohite |
bhavatsmṛtiṃ kaṃcana kālamācaran
bhavatpadaṃ prāpi bhavadbhaṭairasau ||10||
iti-īritai:-	thus being told
yāmya-bhaṭai:-	the messengers of Yama
apāsṛte	having left
bhavat-bhaṭānāṃ ca	and Thy emissaries
gaṇe tirohite	in a group having disappeared
bhavat-smṛtiṃ	having Thy remembrance
kaṃcana kālam-	for some time
ācaran	and worshipping Thee
bhavat-padaṃ prāpi	Thy abode attaining
bhavat-bhaṭai:-asau	this (Ajaamil) (led by) Thy emissaries
The messengers of Yama left when they were told thus. The group of Thy emissaries also disappeared. Ajaamil remembered and worshipped Thee for some time and then attained Thy abode led by Thy emissaries.
svakiṅkarāvedanaśaṅkito yama-
stvadaṃghribhakteṣu na gamyatāmiti |
svakīyabhṛtyānaśiśikṣaduccakai:
sa deva vātālayanātha pāhi mām ||11||
sva-kiṅkara-āvedana-	his messengers reprting1`
śaṅkita: yama:-	the much concerned Yama
tvat-aṃghri-bhakteṣu	to the devotees of Thy feet
na gamyatām-iti	do not go, thus
svakīya-bhṛtyān-	his own messengers
aśiśikṣat-uccakai:	instructed strictly
sa deva vātālayanātha	Thou (who are such) Lord! O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi mām	protect me
Yama was very much concerned at the report of his messengers. He strictly instructed them not to go to the devotees of Thy feet. O Lord! O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who are such, protect me.